schedules/README.md, before:

# Course Schedule & Content

## Day 1

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:30 | Workshop Introduction | Radhika |
| 10:30 - 11:15 | Introduction to R and RStudio | Radhika |
| 11:15 - 11:30 | Overview of self-learning materials and homework submission |  Mary |

### Self-Learning Part 1
1. R Syntax and Data Structure
1. Functions and Arguments

## Day 2

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:20 | Review of data structures and functions | Radhika |
| 10:20 - 10:50 | Review of homework exercises | Mary |
| 10:50 - 11:15 | Packages and libraries | Jihe |
| 11:15 - 12:00 | Data Wrangling: Subsetting Vectors and Factors | Radhika |

### Self-Learning Part 2
1. Reading in and inspecting data
1. Data wrangling: data frames, matrices and lists
1. The %in% operator
1. Reordering and matching
1. Setting up a data frame to plot (+ the `map()` function)

## Day 3

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:30 | Review of subsetting data frames | Mary |
| 10:30 - 11:10 | Review of homework exercises | Mary |
| 11:10 - 12:00 | Plotting with the ggplot2 package | Radhika |

### Self-Learning Part 3
1. Generating a boxplot with ggplot2
1. Writing to file and exporting plots
1. Finding help
1. Tidyverse


## Day 4

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:45 | Review of homework exercises | Radhika |
| 10:45 - 12:00 | Discussion/Office hours | All |

### Final Exercises
1. Exercises and Answer Key


## Building on the basic R knowledge
* DGE workshop
* single-cell RNA-seq workshop
* RMarkdown
* Functional analysis
* More ggplot2 and tidyverse
* RShiny

## Resources
* Online learning resources
* All hbctraining materials

Commit message:

Links added for Day1 and exercises

schedules/README.md, after:

# Course Schedule & Content

## Day 1

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:30 | Workshop Introduction | Radhika |
| 10:30 - 11:15 | [Introduction to R and RStudio](../lessons/01_introR-R-and-RStudio.md) | Radhika |
| 11:15 - 11:30 | Overview of self-learning materials and homework submission |  Mary |

### Self-Learning Part 1
1. [R Syntax and Data Structure](../lessons/02_introR-syntax-and-data-structures.md	)
1. [Functions and Arguments](../lessons/03_introR-functions-and-arguments.md)

### Homework
* All exercises from above lessons have been put together in [html format](../homework/day1_hw_exercises.html) (web access) and [R script format](../homework/day1_hw_exercises.R) (download for local access).
* Add your solutions to the exercises in the downloaded `.R` file and **upload the saved file, renamed with your initials/name** to [Dropbox](https://www.dropbox.com/request/mCrMcxx6WM9NPTBBirsW).

## Day 2

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:20 | Review of data structures and functions | Radhika |
| 10:20 - 10:50 | Review of homework exercises | Mary |
| 10:50 - 11:15 | Packages and libraries | Jihe |
| 11:15 - 12:00 | Data Wrangling: Subsetting Vectors and Factors | Radhika |

### Self-Learning Part 2
1. Reading in and inspecting data
1. Data wrangling: data frames, matrices and lists
1. The %in% operator
1. Reordering and matching
1. Setting up a data frame to plot (+ the `map()` function)

## Day 3

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:30 | Review of subsetting data frames | Mary |
| 10:30 - 11:10 | Review of homework exercises | Mary |
| 11:10 - 12:00 | Plotting with the ggplot2 package | Radhika |

### Self-Learning Part 3
1. Generating a boxplot with ggplot2
1. Writing to file and exporting plots
1. Finding help
1. Tidyverse


## Day 4

| Time            |  Topic  | Instructor |
|:------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| 10:00 - 10:45 | Review of homework exercises | Radhika |
| 10:45 - 12:00 | Discussion/Office hours | All |

### Final Exercises
1. Exercises and Answer Key


## Building on the basic R knowledge
* DGE workshop
* single-cell RNA-seq workshop
* RMarkdown
* Functional analysis
* More ggplot2 and tidyverse
* RShiny

## Resources
* Online learning resources
* All hbctraining materials
